[doc] Fix the release process (#17470)
apache/pulsar: wiki/release/release-process.md

      * [B. Push access to apachepulsar org](#b-push-access-to-apachepulsar-org)
         * [Publish Docker Images directly to apachepulsar org in hub.docker.com](#publish-docker-images-directly-to-apachepulsar-org-in-hubdockercom)
   * [10. Release Helm Chart](#10-release-helm-chart)
   * [11. Publish Python Clients](#11-publish-python-clients)
      * [Linux](#linux)
      * [MacOS](#macos)
   * [12. Publish MacOS libpulsar package](#12-publish-macos-libpulsar-package)
   * [13. Update Python Client docs](#13-update-python-client-docs)
   * [14. Update swagger file](#14-update-swagger-file)
   * [15. Write release notes](#15-write-release-notes)
   * [16. Update the site](#16-update-the-site)
      * [Update the site for major releases](#update-the-site-for-major-releases)
      * [Update the site for minor releases](#update-the-site-for-minor-releases)
   * [17. Announce the release](#17-announce-the-release)
   * [18. Write a blog post for the release (optional)](#18-write-a-blog-post-for-the-release-optional)
   * [19. Remove old releases](#19-remove-old-releases)
   * [20. Move release branch to next version](#20-move-release-branch-to-next-version)

> 

Reviewer: We don't need this manually generated toc. On GitHub you can read toc as:

<img width="1728" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/18818196/188556629-6759b7aa-6acb-44c9-b9ca-05b9a9a2a56f.png">

A manual toc is hard to maintain.

Author: It makes sense. I think we can remove the number as well. Otherwise, when you insert a section, you have to change all subsequent section numbers.

# Release Process

This page contains instructions for Pulsar committers on how to perform a release.

## Preparation

> You should open an discussion in dev@apache.org to notify others that you volunteer to be a release manager. If there are no disagreements, you can start the release process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open a discussion in dev@apache.org to notify others that you volunteer to be the release manager of a specific release. If there are no disagreements, you can start the release process.
```

> For major releases, you should create a new branch named `branch-2.X.0` once all PRs with the 2.X.0 milestone are merged. If some PRs with 2.X.0 milestome are still working in progress and might took much time to complete, you can move it to the next milestone if they are not important. In this case, you'd better to notify the author in the PR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For major releases, you should create a new branch named `branch-2.X.0` once all PRs with the 2.X.0 milestone are merged. If some PRs with the 2.X.0 milestone are still working in progress and might took much time to complete, you can move them to the next milestone if they are not important. In this case, you'd better notify the author in the PR.
```

For minor releases, if there are no disagreements, you should cherry-pick all merged PRs with the `release/X.Y.Z` labels into branch-X.Y. After these PRs are cherry-picked, you should add the `cherry-picked/branch-X.Y` labels.

> Sometimes some PRs cannot be cherry-picked cleanly, you might need to create a separated PR and move the `release/X.Y.Z` label from the original PR to it. In this case, you can ask the author to help creating the new PR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes some PRs cannot be cherry-picked cleanly, you might need to create a separate PR and move the `release/X.Y.Z` label from the original PR to it. In this case, you can ask the author to help create the new PR.
```

> For PRs that are still open, you can choose delaying them to the next release or pinging others to review so that they can be merged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For PRs that are still open, you can choose to delay them to the next release or ping others to review so that they can be merged.
```

> > Tips: If you get error `c++: internal compiler error: Killed (program cc1plus)` when run `pulsar-client-cpp/pkg/deb/docker-build-deb.sh`. You may need to expand your docker memory greater than 2GB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **NOTE**: If you get error `c++: internal compiler error: Killed (program cc1plus)` when run `pulsar-client-cpp/pkg/deb/docker-build-deb.sh`. You may need to expand your docker memory greater than 2GB.
```

We can use `NOTE` consistently.

should be available, something like
https://repository.apache.org/content/repositories/orgapachepulsar-XYZ

## Publish release candidate docker images

> Run the following commands.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the following commands:
```

will be considered binding, while anyone else is encouraged to verify the release and
vote as well.

If the release is approved here, we can then proceed to next step. Otherwise, we should repeat the previous steps and prepare another candidate release to vote.

## Move master branch to next version

> NOTE: This is for major releases only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **NOTE**: This is for major releases only.
```

Consistent format.

Pulsar's KEYS file containing PGP keys we use to sign the release:
https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/dev/pulsar/KEYS

> Docker images:

Reviewer 3: If we add this part. Let's move the first part of 9.A forward, before this Vote. And remove 9.B.

Author: I have linked `#9-publish-docker-images` in the NOTE below. There is no need to move 9.A here, because we only need to build the images and push them to the private account here. But 9.A include one more step:

> Ask a person with access to apachepulsar org in [hub.docker.com](http://hub.docker.com/) to copy the docker images from your (release manager) personal acccount to apachepulsar org.

Reviewer 3: So I refers to "the first part of 9.A". We can split step 9 to "Publish release candidate docker image" and "Publish docker image".
Referring to a step forward make the process kind of out-of-order.

<link of the pulsar images>

<link of the pulsar-all image>

Please download the source package, and follow the README to build
and run the Pulsar standalone service.
```

> **NOTE**
>
> See [here](#9-publish-docker-images) for how to build the docker images. The release manager could push the images to a private account for others to validate.

The vote should be open for at least 72 hours (3 days). Votes from Pulsar PMC members
will be considered binding, while anyone else is encouraged to verify the release and
vote as well.

If the release is approved here, we can then proceed to next step.

## 7. Move master branch to next version

> 

Reviewer 3: We can add note : this is only for major release only.

Author: No. It's also required for release branches. I found it's duplicated with `20. Move branch to next version`. I will remove this part.

Author: I see your comment in step 20. I will update it.

will be considered binding, while anyone else is encouraged to verify the release and
vote as well.

> If the release is approved here, we can then proceed to next step. Otherwise, we should repeat the previous steps and prepare another candidate release to vote.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the release is approved here, we can then proceed to the next step. Otherwise, you should repeat the previous steps and prepare another candidate release to vote.
```
Better keep the pronoun consistent and use the second-person pronoun throughout the guide. It can also be omitted in step-by-step instructions.

## Move master branch to next version

> **NOTE**: This is for major releases only.

We need to move master version to the next iteration `Y` (`X + 1`).

```shell
git checkout master
./src/set-project-version.sh 2.Y.0-SNAPSHOT

git commit -m 'Bumped version to 2.Y.0-SNAPSHOT' -a
```

> Since this needs to be merged in `master`, we need to follow the regular process

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since this needs to be merged into `master`, you need to follow the regular process
```

> and create a Pull Request on github.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and create a Pull Request on GitHub.
```

will be like `orgapachepulsar-XYZ`. Select the repository and click on "Release". Artifacts
will now be made available on Maven central.

> ## 9. Publish Docker Images

Reviewer 3: Maybe we should add the list of committer with access to apachepulsar org?

Author: I don't know where can I found these committers. Could you provide any help here? @codelipenghui

will be like `orgapachepulsar-XYZ`. Select the repository and click on "Release". Artifacts
will now be made available on Maven central.

## Publish Docker Images

> Copy the approved candidate docker images from your personal acccount to apachepulsar org.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Copy the approved candidate docker images from your personal account to apachepulsar org.
```

4. Once it is merged, the chart will be automatically released to Github releases at https://github.com/apache/pulsar-helm-chart and updated to https://pulsar.apache.org/charts.

## Publish Python Clients

> **NOTES**
>

> > 1. You need to create an account on PyPI: https://pypi.org/project/pulsar-client/

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> 1. You need to create an account on PyPI: https://pypi.org/account/register/
```

Author: Yes. In addition, the original link shows where the wheels are uploaded, I will add another line to explain it.

4. Once it is merged, the chart will be automatically released to Github releases at https://github.com/apache/pulsar-helm-chart and updated to https://pulsar.apache.org/charts.

> ## 11. Publish Python Clients

Reviewer 3: It's better to swap step 11 and 12.

Author: The release scripts of the Python client and the C++ client are independent, though the Python client reuses much C++ client code. I think the order of them is not an issue.

Reviewer 3: I mean swap [11. Publish Python Clients] and [12. Publish MacOS libpulsar package]
So that [13. Update Python Client docs] goes right after "Publish Python Clients"

Once the docs are generated, you can add them and submit them in a PR. The expected doc output is `site2/website/static/api/python`.

> ## Publish MacOS libpulsar package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Publish Homebrew libpulsar package
```

It's actually a Homebrew formula and can be used even in Linux OS.

**This step can be skipped if the major version number is not latest.**

> Release a new version of libpulsar for MacOS, You can follow the example [here](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/pull/53514)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Release a new version of libpulsar on Homebrew, You can follow the example [here](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/pull/53514).
```

### MacOS

There is a script that builds and packages the Python client inside Docker images.

```shell
$ pulsar-client-cpp/python/build-mac-wheels.sh
```

The wheel files will be generated at each platform directory under `pulsar-client-cpp/python/pkg/osx/`.
Then you can run `twin upload` to upload those wheel files.

> ## 12. Publish MacOS libpulsar package

Reviewer 3: This is similar with Helm Chart, it can be skipped if the major version number is not latest.

Author: Why? libpulsar in Homebrew could have multiple versions at the same time, but there is only one latest version in the charts repo.

Reviewer 3: 1. I don't see how to install old version of `libpulsar` with `brew`
2. There is no record of non-latest version libpulsr PR in 
[homebrew-core repo history](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/pulls?q=is%3Apr+libpulsar+is%3Aclosed)

Reviewer 3: @chenrui333 Can you help verify this? since you released past few versions of `libpulsar`.

Author: Oh I see. I thought it's similar with `pip`.

```
Send out a PR request for review.

## Write release notes

> See [Pulsar Release Notes Guide](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cwNkBefKyV6OPbEXnUrcCdVZi0i2BezqL6vAL7VqVC0/edit#).

Reviewer: I hope we can inline this guide instead of holding a dangling Google Docs page. But it can be a follow-up.

Author: I agree. Actually I'm opposed to referencing an evolving document in the repo. Especially it's not a huge document. We usually use an external link when the content is huge, like the [Pulsar's transaction design](https://github.com/apache/pulsar/wiki/PIP-31%3A-Transaction-Support).

/cc @Anonymitaet

Once the docs are generated, you can add them and submit them in a PR. The expected doc output is `site2/website/static/api/python`.

## Publish Homebrew libpulsar package

**This step can be skipped if the major version number is not latest.**

> Release a new version of libpulsar for Homebrew, You can follow the example [here](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/pull/53514)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Release a new version of libpulsar for Homebrew, You can follow the example [here](https://github.com/Homebrew/homebrew-core/pull/53514).
```

```
Send out a PR request for review.

## 15. Write release notes

Check the milestone in Github associated with the release.
https://github.com/apache/pulsar/milestones?closed=1

In the release item, add the list of most important changes that happened in the
release and a link to the associated milestone, with the complete list of all the

> changes.

Reviewer 3: I think we should just remove this part. There is no release item in the link.

Author: +1. I'll remove them

svn rm https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/release/pulsar/pulsar-2.Y.0
```

## Move release branch to next version

Run the following commands in release branches.

```shell
./src/set-project-version.sh 2.X.Y-SNAPSHOT

> 
> git commit -m 'Bumped version to 2.X.Y-SNAPSHOT' -a

Reviewer: ```suggestion

git add .
git commit -s -m 'Bumped version to 2.X.Y-SNAPSHOT'
```

In case of the files aren't tracked yet.

Author: No, we should not. Because `set-project-version.sh` will generate a new temporary file `deployment/terraform-ansible/deploy-pulsar.yaml-e` and unfortunately it's not included in `.gitignore`.

Reviewer: I think we should add them to `.gitignor` instead, lol. But fair enough to keep as is.

Author: Yes, we should.

svn rm https://dist.apache.org/repos/dist/release/pulsar/pulsar-2.Y.0
```

> ## 20. Move branch to next version

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## 20. Move release branch to next version
```

Run the following commands in release branches.

```shell
./src/set-project-version.sh 2.X.Y-SNAPSHOT

git commit -m 'Bumped version to 2.Y.0-SNAPSHOT' -a
```

> For major releases, we need to create a Pull Request on GitHub. For patch releases, we can push the commit directly to the release branch.

Reviewer 3: Major release version is done in Step 7.

Author: Got it.
